docs/cosmos-hub/ledger.md Add full ledger tutorial (#4286)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/cosmos-hub/ledger.md

# Ledger Nano Support

> Using a hardware wallet to store your keys greatly improves the security of your crypto assets. The Ledger device acts as an enclave of the seed and private keys, and the process of signing transaction takes place within it. No private information ever leaves the Ledger device. The following is a short tutorial on using the Cosmos Ledger app with the Gaia CLI or the Lunie.io web wallet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a hardware wallet to store your keys greatly improves the security of your crypto assets. The Ledger device acts as an enclave of the seed and private keys, and the process of signing transaction takes place within it. No private information ever leaves the Ledger device. The following is a short tutorial on using the Cosmos Ledger app with the Gaia CLI or the [Lunie.io](https://lunie.io/#/) web wallet.
```

At the core of a Ledger device there is a mnemonic seed phrase that is used to generate private keys. This phrase is generated when you initialize you Ledger. The mnemonic is compatible with Cosmos and can be used to seed new accounts.

> **Do not lose or share your 24 words with anyone. To prevent theft or loss of funds, it is best to keep multiple copies of your mnemonic stored in safe, secure places. If someone is able to gain access to your mnemonic, they will fully control the accounts associated with them.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: danger 
**Do not lose or share your 24 words with anyone. To prevent theft or loss of funds, it is best to keep multiple copies of your mnemonic stored in safe, secure places. If someone is able to gain access to your mnemonic, they will fully control the accounts associated with them.** 
:::
```

> 

Reviewer: delete multiple spacing

# Gaia CLI

The tool used to generate addresses and transactions on the Cosmos Hub network is `gaiacli`. Here is how to get started. If using a CLI tool is unfamiliar to you, scroll down and follow instructions for using the Lunie.io web wallet instead.

### Before you Begin

> - [Install the Cosmos app onto your Ledger] (link to Ledger knowledgebase tutorial)

Reviewer: Newline. This doesn't have the link

- [Install Golang](https://golang.org/doc/install)
- [Install  Gaia](https://cosmos.network/docs/cosmos-hub/installation.html)

Verify that gaiacli is installed correctly with the following command

```bash
$ gaiacli version --long

➜ cosmos-sdk: 0.34.3
git commit: 67ab0b1e1d1e5b898c8cbdede35ad5196dba01b2
vendor hash: 0341b356ad7168074391ca7507f40b050e667722
build tags: netgo ledger
go version go1.11.5 darwin/amd64

```

### Add your Ledger key
- Connect and unlock your Ledger device.
- Open the Cosmos app on your Ledger.
- Create an account in gaiacli from your ledger key. *NOTE*: Be sure to change the *keyName* parameter to be a  meaningful name. The `ledger` flag tells gaiacli to use your Ledger to seed the account.

```bash
$ gaiacli keys add <keyName> --ledger

➜ NAME: TYPE: ADDRESS:     PUBKEY:

> myLedger ledger cosmos1le9666lqqfm06gc5duyp4uqxj42mtw6pff3pew cosmospub1addwnpepqd2unmsvcslvc4lzt36d6083ktf9tjd0tp37d8ngz28cenky2l0h62az70y

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<keyName> ledger cosmos1... cosmospub1...
```

```

### Confirm your address

> Run this command to display your address on the device. Use the keyName you gave your ledger key. The `-d` flag is supported in version 1.5 and higher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run this command to display your address on the device. Use the `keyName` you gave your ledger key. The `-d` flag is supported in version `1.5.0` and higher.
```

Reviewer: ^^

```bash

> $ gaiacli keys show <keyName> -d

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gaiacli keys show <keyName> -d
```

```

> Confirm that the address displayed on the device matches that displayed when you added the key. To review the address again run `$ gaiacli keys list`.

Reviewer: `gaiacli keys list` should be on a new code block

> Note the gaiacli help commands are nested. So `$ gaiacli` will output docs for the top level commands (status, config, query, and tx. You can access documentation for sub commands with further help commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the `gaiacli` help commands are nested. So `$ gaiacli -h` will output docs for the top level commands: `status`, `config`, `query`, and `tx`. You can access documentation for sub commands with further help commands.
```

> `$ gaiacli query --help`

Reviewer: ditto

> `$ gaiacli query --help`

Reviewer: This should be: 

For example, run to print the `query` commands:
```bash
gaiacli query --help
```

> `$ gaiacli tx --help`

Reviewer: same here

> ### Connect to a fullnode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Connect to a full node
```

> Next, you need to configure gaiacli with the URL of a Cosmos fullnode and the appropriate chain_id. In this example we connect to the public load balanced fullnode operated by Chorus One on the cosmoshub-2 chain. But you can point your `gaiacli` to any Cosmos fullnode. Be sure that the `chain_id` is set to the same chain as the fullnode. 

Reviewer: Newline

> `$ gaiacli config node https://cosmos.chorus.one:26657`   

Reviewer: all these should be code blocks
```suggestion
`gaiacli config node <url>:<port>`   
```

> `$ gaiacli config chain_id cosmoshub-2`

Reviewer: code block

Test your connection with a query such as:

`$ gaiacli query staking validators`

*NOTE:* You can choose to run your own fullnode locally [read more here.](https://cosmos.network/docs/cosmos-hub/join-mainnet.html#setting-up-a-new-node).

## Sign a transaction
You are now ready to start signing and sending transactions. Send a transaction with gaiacli using the `tx send` command. 
`$ gaiacli tx send --help` to see all available options.

> *NOTE:* Be sure to unlock your device with the PIN and open the Cosmos app before trying to run these commands

Reviewer: this should be a `:: tip`. See https://vuepress.vuejs.org/guide/markdown.html#custom-containers

Use the `keyName` you set for your Ledger key and gaia will connect with the Cosmos Ledger app to then sign your transaction.

> `$ gaiacli tx send <keyName> <desinationAddress> <amount><denomination>`

Reviewer: code block

When prompted with `confirm transaction before signing`, Answer `Y`.

> Next you will be prompted to review and approve the transaction on your Ledger device. Be sure to inspect the transaction JSON displayed on the screen. You can scroll through each field and each message. Scroll down to read more about the data fields of a standard transaction object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next you will be prompted to review and approve the transaction on your Ledger device. Be sure to inspect the transaction displayed on the screen. You can scroll through each field and each message using the buttons. Scroll down to read more about the data fields of a standard transaction object.
```

Reviewer: ^^

Now, you are all set to start [sending transactions on the network](./delegator-guide-cli.md#sending-transactions).

### Receive funds

> To receive funds to the Cosmos account on your Ledger device, retrieve the address for your Ledger account with this command:

Reviewer: this should also say that only the ones with `TYPE ledger` are keys stored on the device

Reviewer: ^^

> `$ gaiacli keys list`

Reviewer: this should be merged with the code block below

Reviewer: ^^

```bash
NAME:   TYPE:   ADDRESS:                                        PUBKEY:

> myLedger ledger  cosmos1tsewe9jf93hvp2n7wdkw52d3etgtyz3ahfq5fh   cosmospub1addwnpepqw430audr4ulaaaymh4u2up7q89p3la9l2tf5lak4mfjrct2xh48qee70l7

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<key1> ledger cosmos1... cosmospub1...
```

Reviewer: ^^

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Further documentation

> Not sure what gaiacli can do?  Simply run the command without arguments to output documentation for the commands in supports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not sure what `gaiacli` can do? Please refer to the official [Delegator Guide](https://cosmos.network/docs/cosmos-hub/delegator-guide-cli.html) to know how to use it on the Cosmos Hub or  simply run the command without arguments to output documentation for the commands in supports.
```

>  `$ gaiacli`

Reviewer: newline and code block

# Lunie.io 

> The Lunie web wallet supports signing with Ledger Nano S. Here is a short intro to using your Ledger with Lunie.io.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Lunie web wallet supports signing with Ledger Nano S. Here is a short intro to using your Ledger with [Lunie.io](https://lunie.io/#/).
```

Reviewer: and newline

### Connect your device

> - Connect your Ledger device to your computer, unlock it with the PIN and open the Cosmos app.

Reviewer: newline

- Open [https://lunie.io](https://lunie.io) in your web browser (latest version of Google Chrome preferred)
- Click “Sign in”. 
- Choose “Sign in with Ledger Nano S”

### Confirm your address

> Run this command to display your address on the device. Use the keyName you gave your ledger key. The `-d` flag is supported in version 1.5 and higher.

Reviewer: newline 
```suggestion
Run this command to display your address on the device. Use the `keyName` you gave your ledger key. The `-d` flag is supported in version `1.5.0` and higher.
```

Reviewer: ^^

```bash
$ gaiacli keys show <keyName> -d
```

Confirm that the address displayed on your Ledger matches that shown on Lunie.io before proceeding.
Now you can use your Ledger key to sign transctions on Lunie. 

To learn more about using Lunie, [here is a tutorial](https://medium.com/easy2stake/how-to-delegate-re-delegate-un-delegate-cosmos-atoms-with-the-lunie-web-wallet-eb72369e52db) on staking and delegating ATOMs using the Lunie web wallet.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# The Cosmos Standard Transaction

Transactions in Cosmos embed the [Standard Transaction type](https://godoc.org/github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/x/auth#StdTx) from the cosmos-sdk. The Ledger device displays a serialized JSON representation of this object for you to review before signing the transaction. Here are the fields and what they mean

> - `chain-id` The chain to which you are broadcasting the tx, such as the `gaia-13003` testnet or `cosmoshub-2` mainnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `chain-id`: The chain to which you are broadcasting the tx, such as the `gaia-13003` testnet or `cosmoshub-2` mainnet.
```

Reviewer: ^^

> - `account_number` The global id of the sending account assigned when the account recieves funds for the first time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `account_number`: The global id of the sending account assigned when the account receives funds for the first time.
```

Reviewer: ^^

> - `sequence` The nonce for this account, incremented with each transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `sequence`: The nonce for this account, incremented with each transaction.
```

Reviewer: ^^

> - `fee` JSON object describing the transaction fee, its gas amount and coin denomination

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `fee`: object describing the transaction fee, its gas amount and coin denomination
```

Reviewer: ^^

> - `memo` optional text field used in various ways to tag transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `memo`: optional text field used in various ways to tag transactions.
```

Reviewer: ^^

> - `msgs_<index>/<field>` The array of messages included in the transaction. Double click to drill down into nested fields of the JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `msgs_<index>/<field>`: The array of messages included in the transaction. Double click to drill down into nested fields of the object.
```

Reviewer: I think we should also add the types of supported transactions on the Hub

Reviewer: ^^

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Support

> For further support, start by looking over the posts in [cosmos.network forum](https://forum.cosmos.network/search?q=ledger) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For further support, start by looking over the posts in our [forum](https://forum.cosmos.network/search?q=ledger) 
```

> Feel welcome to reach out in our [Telegram channel](https://t.me/cosmosproject

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel welcome to reach out in our [Telegram channel](https://t.me/cosmosproject) to ask for help.
```

> ) to ask for help. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
```

Here are a few relevant and helpful tutorials from the wonderful Cosmos community:

> - [How to Redelegate Cosmos Atoms with the Lunie Web Wallet](https://medium.com/@miranugumanova/how-to-re-delegate-cosmos-atoms-with-lunie-web-wallet-8303752832c5)

Reviewer: it'd be cool to include the author too:
`Author - Title`

Reviewer: ^^

> - [How to store your ATOMS on your Ledger and delegate with the command line](https://medium.com/cryptium-cosmos/how-to-store-your-cosmos-atoms-on-your-ledger-and-delegate-with-the-command-line-929eb29705f)

Reviewer: ditto

Reviewer: ^^

> - HD Wallets in Cosmos and how they are created from the Ledger seed

Reviewer: this one is missing the URL

Reviewer: ^^

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- [Install Golang](https://golang.org/doc/install)

- [Install Gaia](https://cosmos.network/docs/cosmos-hub/installation.html)

Verify that gaiacli is installed correctly with the following command

```bash
$ gaiacli version --long

➜ cosmos-sdk: 0.34.3
git commit: 67ab0b1e1d1e5b898c8cbdede35ad5196dba01b2
vendor hash: 0341b356ad7168074391ca7507f40b050e667722
build tags: netgo ledger
go version go1.11.5 darwin/amd64

```

### Add your Ledger key

- Connect and unlock your Ledger device.
- Open the Cosmos app on your Ledger.
- Create an account in gaiacli from your ledger key.

::: tip
Be sure to change the _keyName_ parameter to be a meaningful name. The `ledger` flag tells gaiacli to use your Ledger to seed the account.
:::

```bash
$ gaiacli keys add <keyName> --ledger

➜ NAME: TYPE: ADDRESS:     PUBKEY:
myLedger ledger cosmos1le9666lqqfm06gc5duyp4uqxj42mtw6pff3pew cosmospub1addwnpepqd2unmsvcslvc4lzt36d6083ktf9tjd0tp37d8ngz28cenky2l0h62az70y
```

Cosmos uses [HD Wallets]('./hd-wallets.md'). This means you can setup many accounts using the same Ledger seed. To create another account from your Ledger device, run;

```bash

> $ gaiacli keys add <secondKeyName> --ledger

Reviewer: no need for `$`
```suggestion
gaiacli keys add <secondKeyName> --ledger
```

```

### Confirm your address

Run this command to display your address on the device. Use the keyName you gave your ledger key. The `-d` flag is supported in version 1.5 and higher.

```bash
$ gaiacli keys show <keyName> -d
```

Confirm that the address displayed on the device matches that displayed when you added the key. To review the address again;

```bash

> $ gaiacli keys list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gaiacli keys list
```

```

::: tip
Note the gaiacli help commands are nested. So `$ gaiacli` will output docs for the top level commands (status, config, query, and tx. You can access documentation for sub commands with further help commands.

For example, to print the `query` commands:

```bash

> $ gaiacli query --help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gaiacli query --help
```

```

Or to print the `tx` (transaction) commands:

```bash

> $ gaiacli tx --help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gaiacli tx --help
```

```
:::

### Connect to a fullnode

> Next, you need to configure gaiacli with the URL of a Cosmos fullnode and the appropriate chain_id. In this example we connect to the public load balanced fullnode operated by Chorus One on the cosmoshub-2 chain. But you can point your `gaiacli` to any Cosmos fullnode. Be sure that the `chain_id` is set to the same chain as the fullnode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you need to configure `gaiacli` with the URL of a Cosmos full node and the appropriate `chain_id`. In this example we connect to the public load balanced full node operated by Chorus One on the `cosmoshub-2` chain. But you can point your `gaiacli` to any Cosmos full node. Be sure that the `chain_id` is set to the same chain as the full node.
```

```bash

> $ gaiacli config node https://cosmos.chorus.one:26657

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gaiacli config node https://cosmos.chorus.one:26657
```

> $ gaiacli config chain_id cosmoshub-2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gaiacli config chain_id cosmoshub-2
```

```

Test your connection with a query such as:

> `$ gaiacli query staking validators`

Reviewer: code block, remove `$`

::: tip

> You can choose to run your own fullnode locally [read more here.](https://cosmos.network/docs/cosmos-hub/join-mainnet.html#setting-up-a-new-node).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run a own full node locally click [here](https://cosmos.network/docs/cosmos-hub/join-mainnet.html#setting-up-a-new-node).
```

:::

## Sign a transaction

You are now ready to start signing and sending transactions. Send a transaction with gaiacli using the `tx send` command.

> `$ gaiacli tx send --help` to see all available options.

Reviewer: code block, remove `$`

::: tip
Be sure to unlock your device with the PIN and open the Cosmos app before trying to run these commands
:::

Use the `keyName` you set for your Ledger key and gaia will connect with the Cosmos Ledger app to then sign your transaction.

```bash

> $ gaiacli tx send <keyName> <desinationAddress> <amount><denomination>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 gaiacli tx send <keyName> <destinationAddress> <amount><denomination>
```

```

When prompted with `confirm transaction before signing`, Answer `Y`.

Next you will be prompted to review and approve the transaction on your Ledger device. Be sure to inspect the transaction JSON displayed on the screen. You can scroll through each field and each message. Scroll down to read more about the data fields of a standard transaction object.

Now, you are all set to start [sending transactions on the network](./delegator-guide-cli.md#sending-transactions).

### Receive funds

To receive funds to the Cosmos account on your Ledger device, retrieve the address for your Ledger account with this command:

`$ gaiacli keys list`

```bash
NAME:   TYPE:   ADDRESS:                                        PUBKEY:
myLedger ledger  cosmos1tsewe9jf93hvp2n7wdkw52d3etgtyz3ahfq5fh   cosmospub1addwnpepqw430audr4ulaaaymh4u2up7q89p3la9l2tf5lak4mfjrct2xh48qee70l7
```

### Further documentation

> Not sure what gaiacli can do? Simply run the command without arguments to output documentation for the commands in supports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not sure what `gaiacli` can do? Simply run the command without arguments to output documentation for the commands in supports.
```

> `$ gaiacli`

Reviewer: newline, code block, remove `$`

# Lunie.io

The Lunie web wallet supports signing with Ledger Nano S. Here is a short intro to using your Ledger with [Lunie.io](https://lunie.io).

### Connect your device

- Connect your Ledger device to your computer, unlock it with the PIN and open the Cosmos app.
- Open [https://lunie.io](https://lunie.io) in your web browser (latest version of Google Chrome preferred)
- Click “Sign in”.
- Choose “Sign in with Ledger Nano S”

### Confirm your address

Run this command to display your address on the device. Use the keyName you gave your ledger key. The `-d` flag is supported in version 1.5 and higher.

```bash

> $ gaiacli keys show <keyName> -d

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gaiacli keys show <keyName> -d
```

```

Confirm that the address displayed on your Ledger matches that shown on Lunie.io before proceeding.
Now you can use your Ledger key to sign transctions on Lunie.

To learn more about using Lunie, [here is a tutorial](https://medium.com/easy2stake/how-to-delegate-re-delegate-un-delegate-cosmos-atoms-with-the-lunie-web-wallet-eb72369e52db) on staking and delegating ATOMs using the Lunie web wallet.

# The Cosmos Standard Transaction

> Transactions in Cosmos embed the [Standard Transaction type](https://godoc.org/github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/x/auth#StdTx) from the cosmos-sdk. The Ledger device displays a serialized JSON representation of this object for you to review before signing the transaction. Here are the fields and what they mean

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transactions in Cosmos embed the [Standard Transaction type](https://godoc.org/github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/x/auth#StdTx) from the Cosmos SDK. The Ledger device displays a serialized JSON representation of this object for you to review before signing the transaction. Here are the fields and what they mean:
```
